A secondary structural common core in the ribosomal ITS2 (internal transcribed spacer) of
          Culexspecies from diverse geographical locations
Abstract
In the present study, sequence and structural analysis of ITS2 region (the spacer segment between 5.8S and 28S rRNA of 
          mature rRNA sequences) of 7 Culex species belonging to 5 different geographical locations was carried out. Alignment of the 
          ITS2 sequence from the 7 species revealed 8 homologous domains. Four species namely C. vishnui, C. annulus, C. pipiens, 
          C. quiquefasciatusshowed high sequence (98­100%) and RNA secondary structure similarity. The ITS2 similarity among different 
          species is high despite their varying geographical locations. Several common features of secondary structure are shared among 
          these species, with some of them supported by compensatory changes, suggesting the significant role by ITS2 as an RNA domain 
          during ribosome biogenesis.

Background

				Culex mosquito species have been described from a wide range of environments and are involved in pathogen transmission from 
      human to reservoirs and vice-versa. [1] Sequence similarity have been 
      reported for ITS2 (the spacer segments between 5.8S and 28S rRNA of mature rRNA sequences) from 5 Culex species of diverse 
      geographic locations. [3–4–
      5–9–
      20] The ITS spacers are versatile as genetic markers and have been used for the determination of taxonomic 
      classification. [17] Recent functional analyses performed on yeast ribosomal 
      RNA genes clearly show that the structural integrity of the transcribed spacer regions is an essential prerequisite for the correct 
      processing of mature rRNA and for the biogenesis of active ribosomal subunits. [2–
      3] The derivation of reliable secondary structure models for each transcribed spacer 
      region would represent a major step towards a detailed understanding of their biological roles.
Comparative sequence analysis provides a powerful tool for identifying biologically relevant folding patterns in RNA molecules. 
      [4] This involves collection of sequences exhibiting substantial nucleotide 
      differences while retaining unequivocal sequence similarity. However, a high degree of sequence variation in the transcribed 
      spacers is known even among closely related species. [5–6–7] Here, we analyze ITS2 from 7 
      Culex species characteristic of 5 different geographical locations to assemble common RNA structural features.

Methodology
Dataset
ITS2 nucleotide sequences from 7 Culex mosquitoes characteristic of 5 geographical locations (Italy, China, Africa, 
      America, and Japan) were downloaded from GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank
      ). The GenBank accession numbers for ITS2 sequences 
      from C. pipens (North America), C. tritaeniorhynchus (China), C. quinquefasciatus
       (Africa), C. tarsalis (Italy), C. annulus (China), C. pseudovishnui 
      (China), and C. vishnui (Japan) were X75817, AF305558, Z48468, U33031, AF453488, AF453498 and AF165900, 
      respectively.

Sequence alignments
Multiple sequence alignments were performed using CLUSTALW with a gap opening penalty of 15 and gap extension penalty of 6.66. 
      [8]

Secondary structure prediction
The RNA secondary structures for ITS2 were predicted using RNADRAW. [21]
      RNADRAW predicts RNA structures by identifying suboptimal structures using the free energy optimization methodology at a default 
      temperature of 370°C.  In the current study, ITS2 and 5.8S regions (the first 170 nucleotides) were used for RNA structure 
      prediction. The minimum energy structure prediction algorithm in RNADRAW was ported from the RNAFOLD program included in the 
      Vienna RNA package. [24] The dynamic programming algorithm employed in 
      RNADRAW was based on the work of Zuker and Stiegler [25] and uses energy 
      parameters taken from Turner [26], Freier [27] and Jaeger. [28]

Phylogenetic analysis
The phylogenetic Genebee service was used for phylogenetic tree construction. [22
      ]

RNA fold
The Sribo program in Sfold (Statistical Folding and Rational Design of Nucleic Acids) was 
      used to predict the probable target accessibility sites (loops) for trans-cleaving ribozymes in ITS2. [24] The prediction of accessibility is based on a statistical sample of the Boltzmann 
      ensemble for secondary structures. Here, we assessed the likelihood of unpaired sites for potential ribozyme target. Each mRNA 
      exists as a population of different structures. Hence, stochastic approach to the evaluation of accessible sites was found 
      appropriate. [29] The probability profiling approach by Ding and Lawrence 
      [30] reveals target sites that are commonly accessible for 
      a large number of statistically representative structures in the target RNA. This novel approach bypasses the long-standing 
      difficulty in accessibility evaluation due to limited representation of probable structures due to high statistical confidence 
      in predictions. The probability profile for individual bases (W = 1) is produced for the region that 
      includes a triplet and two flanking sequences of 15 bases each in every site of the selected cleavage triplet (e.g., GUC).
      


Results and Discussion
ITS2 sequences showed a taxonomic trend similar to that in phylogeny construction (Figure 1A
			). A multiple sequence alignment 
      of 5.8S rDNA and ITS2 showed in Figure 1B indicated that more distantly related species have 
      lower sequence similarity in the 
      ITS2 region. The predicted features of ITS2 using RNADRAW are given in Table 1. The stems 
      (double stranded paired regions) 
      stabilize RNA secondary structures and the number of stems present in each ITS2 is given (Table 1). ITS2 RNA structures from 
      C. pipiens and C. quinquefasciatus have the highest negative free energy (-149.38 Kcal and 
      -148.23 Kcal) followed by C. tarsalis (-129.2), C. annulus and then by C. vishnui
      (-115.3), C. pseudovishnui (-105.66) and C. tritaeniorhyncus (- 82.57). Visual comparison shows 
      that this is related to the trend in the cladogram given in Figure 1A. A high degree of sequence similarity is observed at the 
      5' end compared to the 3' end (Figure 1A). This is due to factors such as genetic drift, the relative number and size of repeats, 
      rates of unequal crossover, gene conversion, immigration and the number of the loci influencing the length. [10] Furthermore, a high level of sequence similarity is found between C. 
      annulus and C. vishnui as well as C.  quinquefasciatus and C.  pipiens.
      The simple tandem repeats shown in Figure 1B as bolded regions are found to be similar. 
      This similarity is seen in corresponding 
      RNA structures and computed energies.
The Culex species considered in this study were then grouped into three classes based on the similarity of 
      RNA stems and loops. Despite their different geographic locations with varying eco-climatic conditions, class I 
      (C. annulus, C. pseudovishnui and C. vishnui) isolates (China and Japan) showed high similarity 
      in secondary structural features. Similar observations were seen in class II (C. pipiens, C. quinquefasciatus and 
      C. tarsalis) isolates from North America and Africa. [19] 
      A high degree of similarity in the 5.8S region unlike the ITS2 is shown for different isolates due to relative evolutionary 
      selection. [9] The loops 11 and 12 having sequences UGUCG and CUUCGGUG, 
      respectively are highly conserved in all classes.
Figure 1C shows the distribution of different types of loops (hairpin, bulge, multi branched, interior and exterior) among 
      different isolates. The segments of the ITS2 having score ≥ 50 are further probed carefully for target site to assess the 
      likelihood of unpaired segments. Interestingly, the observed phylogenetic trend was identified with respect to the target 
      accessibility sites for the seven Culex isolates. The order of preference is interior loop, bulge loop, multiple 
      branched loop, hairpin loop and exterior loops in all the isolates.
Several homologous domains were observed in the ITS regions of Aedes mosquito species by Wesson 
			et al	 [11] and was shown that these domains base pair to 
			form a core region central to 
      several stem features. This suggested that conserved core region of rDNA is more important for a functional rRNA folding 
      pattern. Barker found that ITS2 is unique in the 16 populations of Boophilus microplus, Boophilus decoloratus, 
      Rhipicephalus appendiculatus, Rhipicephalus zambesiensis, Rhipicephalus evertsi, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, Rhipicephalus 
      turanicus, Rhipicephalus pumilio and Rhipicephalus camicasi from different geographical locations. 
      [12] These results suggest that the differences and similarity observed 
      in the ITS2 of different species are not simply accumulated due to random mutation and have evolved for functional selection 
      in ribosome biogenesis. However, it was shown in three related mosquito genera (Aedes, Psorophora and Haemogogus)
      that the intra-spacer variable regions appear to co-evolve and that ITS2 variation is constrained by its secondary structure. 
      [11] Further studies have demonstrated that the ITS2 is essential 
      for the correct and efficient processing and maturation of 26S rRNA ribosomal units. [
      13] Furthermore, the information required for the efficient removal of ITS2 from its RNA precursor is not 
      localized but dispersed throughout the ITS2 region. Thus, insertions and deletions (indels) that affect secondary structures 
      alter rRNA processing. Critical changes in the rRNA folding pattern due to evolutionary sequence variation in the ITS spacer 
      regions may thus have an important role on the kinetics of precursor rRNA formation for the efficient functioning of rDNA clusters.
      

Conclusion
Comparison of ITS2 sequences from different isolates of Culex show similarity and variations. Surprisingly, species displaying 
      sequence similarity belong to different geographical locations with diverse climatic and ecological conditions. This implies that 
      the ITS2 regions have less selective pressure than the ribosomal regions. Several common structural folds were shared among the 
      selected mosquitoes for maintaining functional equivalents. Construction of an evolutionary tree using more isolates of 
      Culex will provide an understanding for their functional selection.


