Suggestions Concerning the Use of the Subclavian which Arises from the Aorta in the Treatment of the Tetralogy of Fallot *
Abstract
Images






 SUGGESTIONS CONCERNING THE USE OF THE SUBCLAVIAN 

 WHICH ARISES FROM THE AORTA IN THE TREATMENT 

 OF THE TETRALOGY OF FALLOT* 

 HARRIS B. SHUMACKER, JR.** 

 In Blalock's early experience with the operative treatment of the tetralogy of Fallot, the two subclavian, the innominate, and carotid arteries were all used for anastomosis to the pulmonary artery. Soon, however, it became evident that use of the innominate or carotid was followed by a relatively high incidence of complications resulting from cerebral ischemia. Blalock suggested, therefore, that the subclavian be used by preference. The subclavian branch of the innominate does not become kinked or badly angulated when it is turned down for the anastomosis, and a good functional result almost invariably follows the completion of a satisfactory anastomosis. The subclavian which arises directly from the aorta, on the other hand, tends to form a bad angle when it is brought down for the anastomosis, and, indeed, near its point of origin it may be so flattened out against the relatively rigid aortic wall as to obstruct all blood flow through it. These considerations led Blalock to recommend the use of the former except in infants under two years of age in whom this artery may be too small and in adults or children over twelve years old or five feet tall with a left aortic arch in whom it is often too short to permit a satisfactory anastomosis.7' 

 In contrast, Paine and Varco,' Lam,6 Holman,' Olim,7 and others have preferred to use the subclavian which arises from the aorta and have obtained generally excellent results. They point out that the tendency to kinking of the artery is more a theoretical than a practical disadvantage, that the exposure and dissection of both the pulmonary artery and the subclavian are easier on the side of the aortic arch, that both vessels are generally longer than on the opposite side and that, as a general rule, the anastomosis can be accomplished more readily. The practical usefulness of a third systemic vessel, namely the aorta, was demonstrated by the development of a technique for side-to-side aortic pulmonary anastomosis by Potts and his associates."0 In spite of the preferences held by individual operators for use of one vessel or another, the fact remains, as Blalock has emphasized, that there is always present a usable systemic vessel provided a suitable pulmonary artery is available. Nevertheless, the choice of the systemic artery in each individual patient is important since in certain cases one or another is unsuitable. 

 * From the Department of Surgery, the Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. Aided by a contract between the Office of Naval Research, Department of the Navy, and Indiana University. 

 ** Resident Surgeon, New Haven Hospital, 1937-1938. Received for publication April 26, 1951. 

 TREATMENT OF TETRALOGY OF FALLOT 

 It has been my custom to follow a policy rather similar to that outlined by Blalock. The subclavian branch of the innominate has generally been preferred in patients ranging between two and twelve years of age and in older individuals in whom there is a right aortic arch. In others the thoracotomy is usually made on the side of the aortic arch, and either the aorta itself or the subclavian arising from the aorta is used for the anastomosis. My experience with the use of the subclavian originating from the aorta is small and the results have not been as good as those which others have reported. One eighteen-month-old child died the day after operation and was found at post-mortem examination to have an occluded anastomosis. In one three-year-old child and one twenty-year-old woman a poor result was obtained and a second operation upon the other side was necessary. In two additional cases the result was only fair. Excluding the patients mentioned in the present report, only in two was an unquestionably good result obtained. 

 Recently, in several cases in which failure seemed evident a modification has been required in order to obtain a functioning shunt. Since these modifications proved successful and since these threats of failure tax one's ingenuiity at the time of operation, I have thought it might be helpful to describe the procedures employed and to illustrate them with case reports. One is a method which obviously has very limited applicability, while the otlher would seem to be rather generally applicable. 

 The first consists of the transplantation of the origin of the subclavian to a more suitable portion of the aorta. 

 Case report 

 The patient was a 19-year-old girl who had been cyanotic since the age of six months. She had developed normally but was always limited in exercise capacity. In her early years of school she was taken to school by her parents and carried to and from her seat in the classroom. She did reasonably well in high school, being driven to and from the school, but she got into severe difficulty when she attempted to attend college. The longer distances between classes and the necessity for climbing stairs precipitated a downhill course, with increasing dyspnea, more marked cyanosis and fatigue, and the onset of bouts of loss of consciousness. The latter occurred several times daily. One which was witnessed by her physician lasted 45 minutes; he feared it would prove fatal. Ordinarily, she could not walk more than half a block. 

 There was marked cyanosis of the nails and mucous membranes and to a lesser extent of the skin. Clubbing was very prominent. All the results of physical and laboratory examination fitted in with a diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot. The hematocrit ranged between 83 and 90. Oxygen saturation of arterial blood was 65 per cent at complete rest. The aortic arch was on the left side. On October 26, 1949 a left lateral thoracotomy was performed, the pleural cavity being entered through the bed of the fifth rib. There was evident greatly increased collateral circulation in the mediastinum and hilum. The pulmonary artery appeared to have markedly reduced blood flow, was very short, small, and thin-walled. Its diameter was less than 5 mm. The aorta seemed to be bowed out laterally in an unusual fashion and the short pulmonary artery could not possibly be brought out over it. The subclavian artery was relatively small, having 

 487 

 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 

 a diameter of only about 4 mm. but it seemed rather long. It was apparent that a Pott's procedure was impossible and that an end-to-side subclavian pulmonary artery anastomosis would be doomed to failure. Hence, the subclavian artery was divided at the level of its first branch, the pulmonary artery was divided proximally, and an end-to-end subclavian-pulmonary anastomosis was carried out. This was done with ease. When the clamps were removed, however, no blood flowed through it. The softwalled subclavian was completely flattened out against the relatively rigid aorta (Fig. 1). When the hilar structures were forcibly elevated in a cephalad direction the subclavian immediately filled and pulsated normally and a thrill could be felt. Simple expansion of the lungs, however, failed to achieve this result and I could conceive of no way in which the hilar region could be held in a more cephalad direction. The subclavian was then ligated at the point where it came off the aorta and its proximal end was anastomosed end-to-side to the descending aorta. It now pulsated vigorously as did the pulmonary artery. In spite of the good pulsation no thrill was palpable. The patient had an uneventful but disappointing convalescence. She remained markedly cyanotic and no continuous bruit was audible. When she left the hospital 14 days after operation there was no improvement in her appearance, hematocrit, or arterial oxygen saturation. 

 Surprisingly enough she reported progress on each follow-up examination. By the end of seven weeks she was obviously less cyanotic, her hematocrit was 77, and she was able to walk a number of blocks and to climb a flight of stairs without difficulty. She reported that she had danced and roller-skated without much trouble. Shortly thereafter a continuous murmur was audible in the left chest. She continued to improve and in January entered a southern college. She did well. At least once a day, often twice, she walked without difficulty from the campus into town and back, a distance of ten blocks each way. She played a little tennis, learned to swim, and began to dance, including jitterbugging. When she xvas seen in June, her color was good, although there was still slight cyanosis of lips and nail beds. There was a very loud, continuous murmur in the left chest. The following fall she transferred to a midwestern university. She got along reasonably well but not as well as she had in a warmer climate and on more level terrain. She walked four or five blocks up and down hills between classes without difficulty in good weather but complained of some dyspnea and fatigue on cold, windy days. She attended dances and often danced each number throughout the evening without trouble. When seen in December she looked well. Her color was good and clubbing was definitely less marked than it had been previously. She had a severe cold at the time. Her oxygen saturation of arterial blood was 75 per cent at rest and it did not fall when she stood or still-walked. The hematocrit was 69. There was audible the same loud continuous murmur in the left chest. 

 Though the patient has been markedly improved, it is recognized that the result is not as good as is commonly obtained when patients with more adequate pulmonary arteries are treated by the conventional anastomosis of a systemic artery to the side of the pulmonary artery. Nevertheless, the patient has thus far been given such good health and relatively normal capacity for ordinary activity that further operation has seemed unwarranted, though the possibility of some future attempt at creation of an additional shunt is being kept in mind. 

 The second procedure embodies the cephalad transplantation of the pulmonary artery by a plastic repair of the incision in the hilar and mediastinal pleural structures. 

 488 

 FIG. 1. Drawing illustrating the condition which existed in the first case after completion of the anastomosis (A) and its correction by transplantation of the origin of the subclavian (B). 

 FIG. 2. Drawing illustrating correction of obstruction to blood flow through the subclavian artery by inverted T or L plastic closure of the defect in the hilar and mediastinal structures. 

 TREATMENT OF TETRALOGY OF FALLOT 

 Case reports 

 The first patient was a fully grown young man of 17 with tetralogy of Fallot which caused considerable incapacity. He was admitted to the hospital on July 18, 1950 and was operated upon two days later. He was known to have a left aortic arch, and a left lateral thoracotomy was performed. The aorta was freed for a side-to-side anastomosis with the pulmonary artery. So much difficulty was encountered, however, in placing the aortic clamp in proper position for making a satisfactory incision in the aorta that the procedure was abandoned and an end-to-side subclavian-pulmonary artery anastomosis accomplished instead. The pulmonary artery was of fair size, having an estimated diameter of 1 cm. The subclavian artery appeared to be quite long and it was of very satisfactory size, having a diameter of about 6 mm. To my dismay, the first portion of the soft-walled subclavian artery was completely flattened out against the rather rigid wall of the aorta and no blood flow through it could be demonstrated, there being no subclavian pulsation nor thrill in the pulmonary artery. If one forcefully elevated the hilum of the lung in a cephalad direction, the obstruction disappeared, the subclavian artery began to pulsate, and a thrill could be palpated. When the lung was allowed to assume its usual position, the subclavian obstruction was again evident and could not be prevented by full expansion of the lung. It was found that the hilar region and the pulmonary artery could be maintained in a satisfactory cephalad position by traction upward upon the cuff of hilar pleura and the adjacent vascular sheath and that these structures were sufficiently strong so that traction could be maintained upon them with a small hemostat. The defect in the mediastinal and hilar tissues was then repaired using a sort of inverted T-plastic closure. By this maneuver success was achieved in elevating the pulmonary artery in a cephalad direction so that the subclavian obstruction was relieved and excellent pulsation was evident (Fig. 2B). A fairly good continuous thrill was palpable. The patient had an uneventful convalescence. When last seen on January 16, 1951 he had excellent color without any visible cyanosis. The clubbing seemed to have decreased somewhat. A continuous murmur was audible. He stated that he noted no limitation of exercise capacity. In outlining his activities he said that, among other things, he was doing a great deal of ice-skating and was playing ice hockey regularly. He was planning to start college work the following month. 

 The second patient was a 16-year-old boy who had been cyanotic since birth. His physical development was somewhat retarded and he was slow in learning to sit and walk. Until he had grown old enough to be self-conscious about it he had always squatted when he was tired. By perseverance he had managed to do more than one would have suspected he could from the degree of his cyanosis. He could walk as much as five or six blocks at a slow pace. He was fond of drums and managed to play occasionally with an orchestra in a somewhat restricted fashion. For the past few months he had had more dyspnea, fatigability, and seemed to be going downhill generally. 

 The results of physical and laboratory studies were rather typical of the tetralogy of Fallot. Clubbing was marked, the nailbeds and mucous membranes were a rather deep purplish-blue color, and the skin had a dusky cyanotic tint. The aortic arch was determined to be on the left. On July 21, 1950 a left lateral thoracotomy was performed, the pleural cavity being entered through the bed of the fourth rib. There was a rather marked increase in the collateral circulation in the mediastinum and the hilar region. The pulmonary artery was easily dissected free. It was fairly long and was about 1 cm. in diameter. The subclavian artery seemed quite long and was of adequate size, having a diameter of about 5 mm. An end-to-side sub9lavian pulmonary anastomosis was performed. Again in this case, however, the first part of the subclavian was acutely angulated and completely flattened out against the aortic wall. There was no 

 489 

 YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 

 pulsation in the subclavian and no thrill in the pulmonary. In this instance also, good blood flow through the subclavian artery was evident whenever the hilar structures were elevated in a cephalad direction but no pulsation was demonstrable simply by expanding fully the lung. Again, a sort of inverted T-plastic closure of the defect in the hilum and mediastinum brought about a cephalad elevation of the pulmonary artery so that tension was released and there was excellent pulsation in the subclavian artery. A thrill was now palpable. Convalescence was uneventful. Improvement in color was evident within a few days and his color was excellent by the time he was discharged from the hospital on the thirteenth postoperative day. He rapidly found that he was now able to lead a quite normal sort of life. When he was seen on December 9 he stated that he had no limitation in exercise capacity. He could walk rapidly without fatigue. He was going to school and was playing the drums in a professional orchestra three or four nights each week. There was some diminution in the clubbing and his color was excellent. There was a loud continuous bruit audible in the chest. On March 27 the arterial oxygen saturation was 88.2 per cent. 

 When I first used this procedure I was rather surprised that such tissues would hold sutures and serve satisfactorily to elevate the hilum. On occasions I had previously toyed with the idea of suturing hilar pleura to the mediastinal pleura but had abandoned it as impractical because the sutures seemed to pull out whenever there was any tension whatsoever. If the procedure is to be successful, it is essential that the sutures encompass any adjacent areolar and fibrous tissue and especially the so-called vascular sheath which surrounds both pulmonary artery and aorta and is dissected free during the course of the operation. Fortunately, in its proximal portion the sheath about the pulmonary artery gains added strength from the extension into it of a reflection of the fibrous pericardium. Sutures through the mediastinal pleura in the region of the aortic arch purposely include the perivascular tissues which have been stripped off the aorta and subclavian artery and also any other available tissue which may lend strength, such as the divided ends of the supreme intercostal vein or other vessels which lhave been transected and ligated. The exact method of repair will vary from case to case. By placing the sutures properly it would seem possible sometimes to displace the pulmonary artery laterally as well as in a cephalad direction if such a maneuver was thought to be desirable (Fig. 2C). On occasions one would close the pleural defect fairly snugly, on others leave it wide open in places. 

 Discussion 

 Though there is always available some suitable systemic vessel and though the major concern in the operative treatment of the tetralogy of Fallot is the adequacy of the pulmonary artery, from time to time one may find the achievement of a satisfactory result thwarted by the local anatomical characteristics regardless of one's choice of procedure. Consequently, those modifications which may add to the likelihood of a successful outcome are important. Blalock"' pointed out the practicability of performing an end-toend subclavian-pulmonary artery anastomosis whenever the pulmonary artery is judged too small or the subclavian too short for a satisfactory end

 490 

 TREATMENT OF TETRALOGY OF FALLOT             491 

 to-side anastomosis. Holman' feels that a poorly functioning shunt after end-to-side anastomosis can usually be corrected by proximal division of the subclavian artery, thus in effect converting the procedure into an end-to-end anastomosis. If a satisfactory end-to-side suture of subclavian and pulmonary arteries or side-to-side aortic pulmonary anastomosis seems difficult to achieve, one may occasionally find it useful to divide the upper lobe branch of the pulmonary artery and carry out an end-to-end suture of the subclavian and the proximal end of the upper lobe branch. Potts and Smith' performed an anastomosis between the proximal end of the upper lobe branch and the side of the aorta in a case in which complete temporary occlusion of the main pulmonary artery was withstood poorly. I have found this principle of division of the upper lobe branch and use of its proximal end of value in obtaining a suitable subclavian pulmonary anastomosis when the subclavian seemed to have inadequate length. On occasions when the systemic vessel seems too short, one may elect to interpose a free vascular transplant,3"' a modification I first employed in 1946 though unfortunately not with success in this instance. 

 The operation performed in my first patient constitutes in reality the use of the subclavian artery as an autogenous graft between the aorta and pulmonary artery. It will obviously not often be the procedure of choice but sometimes may be found a useful measure in converting an apparently inadequate functional shunt into a good one. If my initial experiences with the plastic repair of the defect in the mediastinal and hilar structures are characteristic of what may be expected of this procedure, it would seem to have wide applicability whenever a poorly functioning subclavian-pulmonary shunt seems correctable by cephalad transplantation of the hilar structures and the consequent release of tension. I was unaware of any reference in the literature to its use until belatedly I discovered that I had overlooked a statement in the legend of one of the excellent drawings in Blalock's paper on surgical procedures in pulmonic stenosis.' Here he states that suture of the pleura of the superior aspect of the hilum to the mediastinal pleura may effectively elevate a little the pulmonary artery. Perhaps our more detailed consideration of this maneuver may add to its general usefulness. 

 REFERENCES 

 1 Blalock, A.: The technique of creation of an artificial ductus arteriosus in the 

 treatment of pulmonic stenosis. J. Thorac. Surg., 1947, 16, 244. 

 2 Blalock, A.: Surgical procedures employed and anatomical variations encountered 

 in the treatment of congenital pulmonic stenosis. Surg., Gyn. Obst., 1948, 87, 385. 

 3 Gross, R. E., Bill, A. H., Jr., and Pierce, E. C.: Methods for preservation and 

 transplantation of aortic grafts. Observation on arterial grafts in dogs. Report of transplantation of preserved arterial grafts in nine human cases. Surg., Gyn. Obst., 1949, 88, 689. 

 4 Holman, E.: The surgery of pulmonary stenosis. Experiences with left subclavian 

 to left pulmonary artery anastomosis. J. Thorac. Surg., 1949, 18, 827. 

 5 Johnson, J., Kirby, C. K., Greifenstein, F. E., and Costillo, A.: The experimental 

 and clinical use of vein grafts to replace defects of large arteries. Surgery, 1949, 26, 945. 

 492             YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 

 6 Lam, C. R.: The choice of the side for approach in operations for pulmonary 

 stenosis. J. Thorac. Surg., 1949, 18, 661. 

 7 Olim, C. B.: Experiences in the surgical treatment of congenital pulmonary 

 stenosis. American Surgeon, 1951, 17, 245. 

 8 Paine, J. R. and Varco, R. C.: Experiences with the surgical treatment of pul

 monic stenosis. Surgery, 1948, 24, 355. 

 9 Potts, W. J. and Smith, S.: New surgical procedures in certain cases of congenital 

 pulmonary stenosis. Arch. Surg., 1949, 59, 491. 

 10 Potts, W. J., Smith S., and Gibson, S.: Anastomosis of the aorta to a pulmonary 

 artery; certain types in congenital heart disease. J. Am. M. Ass., 1946, 132, 627. 