Preparation of oligodeoxyribonucleoside methylphosphonates on a polystyrene support.
Abstract
An efficient procedure is described for synthesizing deoxyribonucleoside methylphosphonates on polystyrene polymer supports which involves condensing 5'-dimethoxytrityldeoxynucleoside 3'-methylphosphonates. The oligomers are removed from the support and the base protecting groups hydrolyzed by treatment with ethylenediamine in ethanol, which avoids hydrolysis of the methylphosphonate linkages. Two types of oligomers were synthesized: those containing only methylphosphonate linkages, d-Np(Np)nN, and those which terminate with a 5' nucleotide residue, dNp (Np)nN. The latter oligomers can be phosphorylated by polynucleotide kinase, and are separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis according to their chain length. Piperdine randomly cleaves the oligomer methylphosphonate linkages and generates a series of shorter oligomers whose number corresponds to the length of the original oligomer. Apurinic sites introduced by acid treatment spontaneously hydrolyze to give oligomers which terminate with free 3' and 5' OH groups. These reactions may be used to characterize the oligomers.Images






 Vlue1Nubr1193NcecAisRsah 

 Preparation of oligodeoxyribonucleoside methylphosphonates on a polystyrene support P.S.Miller, C.H.Agris, A.Murakami, P.M.Reddy, S.A.Spitz and P.O.P.Ts'o 

 Division of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, School of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA 

 Received 26 July 1983; Accepted 5 September 1983 

 ABSTRACT 

 An efficient procedure is described for synthesizing deoxyribonucleoside methylphosphonates on polystyrene polyner supports which involves condensing 5'-dimethoxytrityldeoxynucleoside 3'-methylphosphonates.  The oligomers are removed from the support and the base protecting groups hydrolyzed by 

 treatment with ethylenediamine in ethanol, which avoids hydrolysis of the 

 methylphosphonate linkages. Two types of oligomers were synthesized: those containing only methylphosphonate linkages, d-Np(Np) N, and those which 

 terminate with a 5' nucleotide residue, dNp(Np)N.-J he latter oligomers can be phosphorylated by polynucleotide kinase, and are separated by 

 polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis according to their chain length.  Piperdine randomly cleaves the oligomer methylphosphonate linkages and generates a 

 series of shorter oligomers whose number corresponds to the length of the 

 original oligomer. Apurinic sites introduced by acid treatment spontaneously hydrolyze to give oligomers which terminate with free 3' and 5' OH groups. These reactions may be used to characterize the oligomers. 

 INTRODUCTION 

 Oligonucleoside methylphosphonates have been used to st-udy the function of specific RNA sequences in biochemical and intact cellular systems (1,2). 

 Since these nonionic nucleic acid analogs can be taken up intact by mammalian cells and certain bacterial cells in culture, these compounds promise to be useful reagents for exploring and regulating the function of nucleic acids within living cells. 

 In order to carry out more extensive biochemical and biological studies, an efficient method for synthesis of oligonucleoside methylphosphonates of defined sequence is needed. Previously we described the synthesis of 

 methylphosphonate analogs on a silica gel support (3). Protected nucleoside 3'-methylphosphonic chlorides or tetrazolides were used as synthetic 

 intermediates. While oligothymidine methylphosphonates could be efficiently synthesized by this procedure, low yields were encountered when other 

 nucleosides, particularly d-[(MeO)2Tr]ibuG were used. Recently Sinha et al. 

 ?) I RL Press Limited, Oxford, England. 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 Volume 1 1 Number 18 1983 

 6225 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 described the preparation of oligonucleoside methylphosphophonates on a glass support using nucleoside 3'-methylphosphine chlorides as reactive intermediates (4). 

 In this paper we describe a set of useful methods for the synthesis and analysis of these analogs. The synthesis involves condensation of protected nucleoside 3'-methylphosphonate triethylammonium salts with nucleosides or 

 oligomers linked to a polystyrene support. This method has proven to be easy to use and allows relatively rapid synthesis of oligomers of defined sequence up to nine nucleosides in length. We have also developed conditions for the 

 efficient removal of base protecting groups and subsequent purification of the oligomers. A novel hydrolysis reaction which can be used as a basis for 

 characterizing and sequencing these oligonucleotide analogs occurs at apurinic sites created by acid treatment of the oligomers. EXPERIMENTAL 

 Materials and Methods 

 Protected nucleosides, d-[(MeO)2Tr]N, were purchased from P.L. 

 Biochemicals and were used without further purification. Protected nucleoside 3'-methylphosphonate triethylammoni um salts, d-[(MeO)2Tr]Np*Et3NH, were 

 prepared as previously described (3). 5-Dimethoxytrityl protected nucleosides esterified to 1% or 2% crosslinked polystyrene were purchased from Chem Genes Inc. The nucleoside loading level was 40 to 120 pmol of 

 nucleoside/g of support. Mesitylenesulfonyl-3-nitrotriazole (MSNT) was purchased from Vega Biochemicals. Anhydrous pyridine was prepared by 

 refluxing previously purified pyridine (5) over calcium hydride chips for several hours followed by distillation onto calcium hydride chips in 5 ml V-vials fitted with Teflon-lined septum caps (Wheaton Scientific). 

 Lyophilized spleen phosphodiesterase was obtained from P.L. Biochemicals. T-4 polynucleotide kinase and [y-32P]-ATP were obtained from New England Nuclear. Reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was carried out on Whatman Inc. C-18 (ODS-3) columns (0.4 x 25 cm). Analytical columns were 

 eluted with 50 ml linear gradients of acetonitrile in water or acetonitrile in 0.1 M ammonium acetate (pH 5.8) at a flow rate of 2.5 ml/min. The eluate was 

 monitored at 254 nm. The following molar extinction coefficients were used at 254 nm: d-T 7,250, dA 13,270, dC 6,260, dG 13,700. Unless otherwise noted, all reactions and operations were carried out at room temperature. 

 General Procedure for Preparing Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. The 

 following procedure represents the current method used in our laboratory to 

 6226 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 synthesize methylphosphonate oligomers. Table I lists some of the oligomers which have been synthesized on polystyrene supports.  Oligomers 7, 8, and 10 were synthesized as described below. The other oligomers were synthesized in essentially the same manner except the condensation reactions were run in 1 ml V-vials or in glass reaction columns purchased from Bachem Inc. When the 

 reactions were run in V-vials, the support was dried by several evaporations 

 with anhydrous pyridine in the V-vial (3). When the reactions were run in the glass reaction column, the support was dried by a single evaporation with anhydrous pyridine overnight at room temperature. 

 Synthesis of Protected Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. The synthetic 

 reactions are most conveniently carried out in a polypropylene col umn (Bio Rad Econo column) fitted with a Teflon 3-way valve (Bio Rad) and a rubber septum cap (Wheaton Scientific). During washing operations, the septum cap is removed and the 3-way valve is connected to a filter flask via a Luerer 

 adaptor and tubing set (Bio Rad). Generally vacuum is not required to wash 

 the support. During the drying step, one port of the 3-way valve is connected to a cold trap and vacuum pump via the barrel of a 1 ml plastic syringe. The other port is connected to a Drierite column filled with dry argon. 

 A reaction cycle consists of the following 10 steps: 1) The support (60 mg, 1% crosslinked) in the column is washed with three 2 ml portions of 

 methylene chloride/isopropanol (85:15, v/v). 2) The support is treated with 2 ml of 1 M zinc bromide in methylene chloride/isopropanol solution.   Two fiveminute treatments are used when the support-bound nucleoside is 

 d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzA or d-[(MeO)2Tr]ibuG, while four treatments are used when the nucleoside is d-[(MeO)2Tr]T or d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzC. After each treatment the 

 orange solution is collected in a clean flask. 3) The support is washed with two 2 ml portions of methylene chloride/isopropanol and the washings are 

 collected in same flask used in step 2). The solution is diluted to 50 ml and a 0.20 ml aliquot is dissolved in 0.80 ml of perchloric acid/ethanol (3:2, 

 v/v). The absorbance is determined at 500 nm and the amount of trityl cation is determined using a molar extinction coefficient of 89,000. 4) The column is attached to a waste flask and the support is washed with three 2 ml 

 portions of 0.5 M triethylammonium acetate in dimethylformamide; three 2 ml 

 portions of anhydrous pyridine and three 2 ml portions of diethyl ether. 5) The column is fitted with the septum cap and set up in the drying mode under 

 house vacuum for at least 5 min. 6) The support is dried by adding 300 jl of anhydrous pyridine via a gas tight syringe (Hamilton). After the support has swollen, the vacuum (oil pump) is applied and the support is warmed with a 

 6227 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 stream of air from a hair dryer.  Evaporation is continued for 10 min.  Dry argon is then admitted and the drying operation is repeated two more times. 

 7) The coupling mixture is prepared by dissolving 0.20 mmol of MSNT in 320 pl of anhydrous pyridine. The solution is then transferred to the vial 

 containing 0.06 mmol of d-[(MeO)2Tr]Np-Et3NH. The nucleotide is dissolved by vortexing and the coupling solution is then added dropwise to the support. It is important to add the solution slowly and to allow the support to swell. 

 Trapped gas bubbles may be removed by gently tapping the column. This entire operation is carried out using one predried syringe. The syringe is left in 

 the V-vial while the reagents are being dissolved. 8) The reaction mixture is kept at room temperature for two hrs. 9) The column is set up in the 

 washing mode and the support is washed with three 2 ml portions of anhydrous pyridine. The solution, which contains unreacted nucleoside 

 3'-methylphosphonate and MSNT, is collected in a separate flask. A 50% 

 aqueous pyridine solution (1 ml) is added and the solution is kept at 40C for 

 later purification and recovery of d-[(MeO)2Tr]Np. 10) The support is treated with a solution containing 2 ml of anhydrous pyridine, 1 ml of acetic 

 anhydride and 20 mg of dimethylaminopyridine for 30 min. (This step was not included for the synthesis of oligomer 10). 11) Return to step 1, for the next cycle. 

 Removal of Base Protecting Groups. The following general procedure was found to be the most effective method for cleaving the oligonucleotide from the 1% crosslinked support and for removing the base protecting groups with minimal hydrolysis of the phosphonate backbone. The following steps were used for 

 deprotecting oligomers 7, 8 and 10. Oligomer 9 was deprotected in a similar 

 fashion except step 4) was carried out at 650C for 3 hrs. For oligomers 1-6, step 3) was not included and step 4) was carried out at 650 for 3 hrs. 

 1) After the final condensation step the support (60 mg) is washed with three 2 ml portions of anhydrous pyridine; three 2 ml portions of methylene 

 chloride/isopropanol and three 2 ml portions of diethyl ether. The support is then dried under house vacuum. 2) The support is swollen by addition of 2 ml of pyridine and the excess is removed under house vacuum. 3) The support is treated with 3 ml of 0.017 M tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride in 

 tetrahydrofuran/pyridine/water (8:1:1, v/v) for 40 hrs at room temperature. 

 No shaking is required. The support is then washed with three 2 ml portions of 50% pyridine/water; three 2 ml portions of pyridine; and three 2 ml 

 portions of methylene chloride/isopropanol. 4) The support is treated with 3 ml of ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) for 7 hrs at room temperature 

 6228 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 without shaking. The solution is collected and the support is washed with 

 four 2 ml portions of pyridine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) and four 2 ml portions of N,N-dimethylformamide. The combined eluate and washings are evaporated at 250C and the oily residue is co-evaporated several time with 50% aqueous ethanol. 

 Purification of Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. For oligomers which 

 contain only methylphosphonate linkages (1-6), the residue from step 4) of the previous section is dissolved in a small volume of 50% aqueous ethanol. The solution is chromatographed on a C-18 reversed phase column (0.46 cm x 25 cm 

 for 100 A254 units or less; 0.9 cm x 50 cm for more than 100 A254 units) using a linear gradient of 0% to 25% (8-mer or less) or 0% to 35% (9 mer) 

 acetonitrile in water to remove non-tritylated oligomers. The desired 

 tritylated oligomer is eluted with 50% acetonitrile in water. The solvents are evaporated and the residue is treated with 1 ml of 80% acetic acid in water for 1 hr at room temperature. The solvents are evaporated and the 

 residue is repeatedly evaporated with ethanol to ensure complete removal of 

 acetic acid. The oligomer is then purified by C-18 reversed phase HPLC using a 0% to 25% or 30% acetonitrile in water gradient. 

 For oligomers which terminate with a 5'-nucleoside phosphodiester linkage (7-10) the residue from step 4) described in the preceeding section is treated with 80% acetic acid in water for 15 min at room temperature. After removal of the acetic acid by evaporation, the residue is dissolved in 20 ml of 50% aqueous ethanol and the solution is passed through a DEAE cellulose column (2.5 x 8 cm, bicarbonate form) which has been previously washed with 50% aqueous ethanol. The column is monitored at 254 nm and washed with 50% 

 aqueous ethanol until the pen returns to the baseline. The desired oligomer is then eluted with 0.15 M triethylammonium bicarbonate in 50% aqueous 

 ethanol. The buffer is removed by evaporation and co-evaporated with 50% 

 aqueous ethanol. The oligomer is then further purified by C-18 reversed phase HPLC using a 0% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.10 M ammonium acetate (pH 5.8) 

 gradient. The oligomer is freed of ammonium acetate by desalting on a Bio-Gel P-2 column (1.5 x 20 cm). 

 Removal of the 5'-Terminal Nucleotide Unit. Oligomers which terminate with a 5'-nucleotide phosphodiester may be converted to the oligonucleoside 

 methylphosphonate by the following procedure. The oligomer (3 A254 units) is dissolved in 40 pl of water and treated at 370C for 2 hrs with 10 PI (1-2 

 units) of spleen phosphodiesterase dissolved in water. The completeness of the reaction is determined by reversed phase HPLC. The solution is then 

 6229 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 diluted with 50 ul of water and passed through a DEAE cellulose column (0.5 x 1 cm).  The column is washed with 500 Pl of water and the oligomer is recovered by lyophilization. 

 Recovery of Protected Nucleoside 3'-Methylphosphonates.  The aqueous pyridine solution from step 9) described in General Procedure for Preparing 

 Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates, is evaporated after addition of 0.1 ml of triethylamine. The residue is dissolved in 50 ml of chloroform and the 

 solution is extracted twice with 50 ml of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate. The 

 chloroform layer is dried over anhydrous sodium sulfate. Several drops of triethylamine are added to clarify the solution.  After filtration the 

 solvents are evaporated and the residue is evaporated with three 2 ml portions of anhydrous pyridine on an oil pump. The foamy residue is dissolved in 2 ml of dry methylene chloride and the solution is added dropwise to a stirred solution of 1% triethylamine in hexane.  The resulting precipitate is 

 collected via filtration on a sintered glass filter, washed with hexane and dried in a vacuum desiccator. 

 Removal of Base Protecting Groups with Ethylenediamine. Several mg of 

 d-I[(MeO)2Tr]bzA, d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzC and d-[(MeO)2Tr]ibu G were each dissolved in 250 pl of ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1,v/v). The solutions were incubated at room temperature. At various times aliquots were chromatographed on silica gel TLC plates which were eluted with 10% methanol in chloroform. The spots corresponding to the starting material and the product were cut out and 

 treated with 1.5 ml of perchloric acid/ethanol (3:2, v/v) for 30 min. The 

 absorbance of each solution was measured at 500 nm and the percent reaction was determined. The half-lives of the reactions are given in Table II. Removal of Protected- Nucleosides from Polystyrene Support. Five mg of d-[(MeO)2Tr]T(ED(1% crosslinked), d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzA O?(1% crosslinked), 

 d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzC(?)(1% and 2% crosslinked) and d-[(MeO)2Tr]ibuGcD(1% and 2% crosslinked) were each treated with 500 ul of ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution at room temperature. At various times, 10 pl aliquots were 

 removed, the solvent was evaporated and the residue was dissolved in 1 ml of perchloric acid/ethanol solution (3:2, v/v). The amount of dimethoxytrityl cation and hence the amount of nucleoside cleaved from the support was 

 determined by measuring the absorbance at 500 nm. The half lives of the cleavage reactions are given in Table II. 

 Hydrolysis of the Methylphosphonate Linkage by Ethylenediamine. 

 Oligonucleoside methylphosphonates (1.25 A254 units each) were treated with 50 il of ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) at room temperature. Aliquots 

 6230 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 (10 pl) were withdrawn at various times and the solvents were evaporated. The residue was dissolved in 20 PI of 50% aqueous ethanol and the solution 

 examined by C-18 reversed phase HPLC using a 0% to 25% acetonitrile in water gradient. The mole percent of starting oligomer remaining after 100 hrs of treatment is given in Table III. 

 Hydrolysis of Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates in Acid. Six A254 units of oligomer were dissolved in 100 pl of 0.01 M hydrochloric acid solution. The 

 solution was heated at either 450 or 650C. Aliquots (10 Pil) were withdrawn at various times and added to 10 pl of 0.015 M ammonium hydroxide at 0?C. The samples were then injected directly onto a C-18 reversed phase column which 

 was eluted with 50 ml of a linear gradient of 0% to 25% acetonitrile in water 

 at a flow rate of 2.5 ml/min. The products of the reaction were determined by comparison with authentic samples. 

 Labeling 5'-End of Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates with T4-Polynucleotide Kinase. Oligonucleoside methylphosphonates (2 nmol) were dissolved in a buffer solution containing 50 mM Tris-HC1 (pH 9.0), 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM dithiothreitol, 20 pM spermidine, and [y-32P]ATP (8 ljCi, 4Ci/mmol). 

 T4-polynucleotide kinase (4 units) was added to the solution, which was made up to 50 ul by adding water. The solutions were incubated at 370C for 2 hrs. The reaction was checked by PEI-cellulose TLC. The PEI-cellulose plate 

 (12x2Ocm, Merck) was preactivated by elution with 1.2 M pyridinium formate (pH 3.5). Small aliquots (0.1 pl) of PNK reaction solutions were applied and 

 developed with 1.5 M pyridinium formate (pH 3.5). The TLC plate was dried and autoradiographed using an intensifying screen at room temperature. 

 Gel Electrophoresis of 5'-Labeled Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. 

 Polyacrylamide gels were prepared by polymerizing a solution containing 18% (w/v) acrylamide, 0.8% (w/v) N,N'-methylenebisacrylamide. 7M urea, 89 mM Tris-borate (pH 8.2), 2 mM EDTA, 0.07% (w/v) ammonium persulfate, in the 

 presence of N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine (20 Pil/20 ml solution). The 

 solution was poured into a 0.75 x 140 x 150 mm mold and allowed to polymerize for 2 hrs at room temperature. 5'-Labeled oligonucleoside methylphosphonates were dissolved in 10% aqueous glycerol solution containing 0.04% bromophenol blue and applied to the gel. The electrophoresis was run using 89 mM 

 Tris-Borate buffer containing 10 mM EDTA. After electrophoresis the gel was dried using a gel-dryer and autoradiographed using intensifying screens at room temperature. 

 Pa rti al Cl eavage of 01 i gonucl eosi de Methyl phosphonates wi th Hydrochl ori c Aci d or Piperidine. Aliquots (1 ,jl) from the polynucleotide kinase reaction 

 6231 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 mixture were incubated with 1 il of 1 M hydrochloric acid at 37?C for 30 min. After incubation the solution was neutralized with 1 Pl of 1 M ammonium 

 hydroxide and then allowed to stand at room temperature for 10 min before cooling to 00. Alternatively, aliquots (1 pl) from the phosphorylation 

 reaction were incubated with 1 ul of 1 M aqueous piperidine at 370C for 10 min after which the solution was cooled to 0? and evaporated. The treated 

 samples were then subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as described above without further purification. 

 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

 Synthesis of Protected Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. Table I shows some of the protected oligonucleoside methylphosphonates which have been 

 synthesized on aminomethyl succinyl-derivatized polystyrene supports. The basic synthetic steps which are shown in Figure 1 are described in detail in the Experimental section. These steps are: (1) removal of the 

 dimethoxytrityl group with 1 M zinc bromide solution; (2) drying the support 

 via co-evaporation with anhydrous pyridine; (3) reaction of the support-bound 

 nucleoside or oligonucleotide with a coupling mixture containing 0.15 to 0.2 M d-[(MeO)2Tr)-NpjEt3NH and 0.3 to 0.6 M mesitylenesulfonyl-3-nitrotriazole in anhydrous pyridine and (4) acetylation of unreacted 5'-OH groups with acetic 

 anhydride. The reactions and washing steps were most conveniently carried out in a polypropylene Econo Column fitted with a septum cap and a 3-way Teflon 

 DMTrO ,O                               Figure 1: Preparation of Protected 

 Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates on a 1   T  o   w             Polystyrene Support 

 0 

 H BFvON     DlDTrOjO4B 

 U )I               CH3-gd-OEt 3NH 

 0 

 6232 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 stopcock. Thus no transfers of the support are required using this apparatus. 

 The synthetic procedure is analogous to the phosphotriester approach used to prepared protected oligonucleotide phosphotriesters on polystyrene supports (6). However, we found the methylphosrhonate coupling reaction to be 

 extremely sensitive to moisture. Drying procedures such as washing with 

 anhydrous solvent or blowing dry nitrogen gas through the support which are satisfactory for phosphotriester synthesis resulted in low yields of the methylphosphonates. The best yields were obtained when the support was 

 co-evaporated with anhydrous pyridine by directly attaching the reaction 

 column to a vacuum pump and dry-ice trap. Three 10 min co-evaporations were sufficient to render the support anhydrous. 

 The protected nucleoside 3'-methylphosphonate triethylammonium salts used in the coupling reactions were prepared from their cyanoethyl ester 

 derivatives (3). These monomers were recovered after each coupling step and 

 were freed of unreacted MSNT by a simple extraction step. After precipitation and drying, the monomers could be reused for other syntheses. The ability to recover the unreacted monomers is particularly important for large scale 

 synthesis since large excesses of these materials are employed in the coupling step. This recovery step represents a potential advantage over the phosphine synthetic method (4), since it is not clear that nucleoside 3'-methylphosphine chlorides can be recovered after reaction. 

 Two types of methylphosphonate oligomers were prepared; those which contain only methylphosphonate linkages, oligomers 1-6, and those which terminate with a 5'-nucleoside 3'-p-chlorophenyl phosphotriester moiety, 

 oligomers 7-10. Oligomers were synthesized on both 1% and 2% crosslinked 

 supports. As shown in Table I, the average yield per coupling step which was determined by trityl group analysis was approximately 82%, for both types of 

 support. This yield is adequate to allow preparation of protected octamers or nonamers in 25% and 20% overall yield, respectively. 

 Deprotection. Our previous studies (1) and those of Sinha et al. (4) show 

 that methylphosphonate linkages are cleaved by base. We found this hydrolysis reaction to depend to some extent upon the nucleoside sequence of the 

 oligomer. Hydrolysis of methylphosphonate linkages by concentrated ammonium hydroxide in pyridine (1:1 v/v), the reagent commonly used to remove 

 oligonucleotide base protecting groups, can be largely suppressed if the 

 reactions are run at 0?C (1). However, these conditions are unsatisfactory for removal of oligonucleoside methylphosphonates from the polystyrene 

 6233 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 Table I.   Syntheses of Protected Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates on 

 Polystyrene Supports 

 Support   Average cross-    yield Protected oligomer (a)                      linking    per 

 (%)       coupling 

 step (%) 

 1  d- [ (MeO) 2Tr]bzCpbzCpbzApT-O                              1         81 2  d-[(MeO)2Tr]ibuGpbzCpbzCpbzApT-                             1         82 3  d- [ (MeO) 2Tr]bzCpbzApi buGpi buGpTpbzApbzA-G1i            2         83 4  d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzCLpTpT bzApbzCpbzCpTpibuG- ?                  2         85 5  d-[(MeO)2Tr]TpbzCpbzCpTpbzCpbzCpTpibuG-(?                   2         86 6  d-[(MeO)2Tr]TpTpTpbzApbzCpbzCpTpT-?                         1         83 7  d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzApbzApbzA-?                                   1         83 8  d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzA4bzCpbzCpbzApT-?                             1         81 9  d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzApibuGpbzCpbzApbzApibuG- (                    2         74 10  d-[(MeO)2Tr]bzApbzApbzApbzApibuGpbzCpbzApbzApibuG-(Q        1         86 

 (a)   p = methylphosphonate linkage 

 T = p-chlorophenyl phosphotriester linkage (Q= polystyrene support 

 (b)   Determined by analysis of the dimethoxytrityl group after each 

 coupling step. 

 support. We therefore examined other deprotection procedures. 

 Recently Barnett and Letsinger described removal of base protecting groups from oligonucleotide B,B,0-trichloroethylphosphotriesters using a 

 mixture of ethylenediamine in phenol (7). We have found ethylenediamine in ethanol (1:1, v/v) rapidly and cleanly removes benzoyl and isobutyryl protecting groups from dA, dC and dG nucleosides. This reagent is 

 particularly attractive since it can be easily removed by evaporation. 

 In our initial investigations, ol igonucleoside methylphosphonates were 

 cleaved from the support and base protecting groups were removed by treatment with ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) at 65?C for 3 hrs. Although 

 preliminary results indicated the methylphosphonate linkages of several dimers were stable to these conditions, we later found that the linkages of onger 

 6234 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 Table II.   Hydrolysis of Protected Nucleosides by Ethylenediamine at 220C 

 Protected                       Time required to          Time required to nucleoside                      remove 50% of the         cleave 50% of the 

 base protecting           nucleoside from the groups (min)              1% crosslinked 

 support (min) 

 d-[(MeO)2Tr)bzA                      10                         105 d-[(MeO) 2Tr bzC                     20                         105 d- [ (MeO) 2Tr]i buG                 40                          54 d- [ (MeO) 2Tr]T                     _                          105 

 oligomers were hydrolyzed to various extents by this procedure.  This of 

 course resulted in loss of product as was evidenced by the presence of shorter oligomers in amounts greater than expected based upon the coupling yields. 

 To circumvent this problem we examined the deprotection reactions at lower temperatures and found they could be run effectively at room 

 temperature. Table II shows the half-lives for removing the base protecting groups from nucleosides at room temperature. While the isobutryl protecting group is removed at the slowest rate, all the groups are completely removed within 240 min. The sole product of each reaction is the 5'-O-dimethoxytritylnucleoside as shown by TLC. 

 Table II also shows the half-lives for cleavage of protected nucleosides from the 1% crosslinked support. The deoxyguanosine nucleoside is cleaved 

 most rapidly while the other three nucleosides have essentially the same rates of hydrolysis. All the nucleosides are completely removed from the support within 7 hrs. In contrast, very different rates were observed for the 2% 

 crosslinked supports. In these cases, very little cleavage occurred during the first 4 hrs of incubation after which increasing amounts of nucleoside were released over a 24 hr period. This effect may be due to the slower swelling rate of the 2% crosslinked support versus the 1% support. The 

 results of these experiments suggest that, although condensation reactions 

 occur with equal efficiencies on both the 1% and 2% crosslinked supports, the 1% support is preferred for syntheses since the oligomers can be removed more readily under mild conditions. 

 The stability of the methylphosphonate linkage in a number of oligomers 

 of varying chain length and base composition was examined following prolonged exposure to ethylenediamine/ethanol at room temperature. As shown in Table III, some of these oligomers, most notably the dimer and d-GpGpT, were 

 6235 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 Table III.   Hydrolysis of Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates by 

 Ethylenediamine at 22?C 

 | Oligomer           Mole percent of oligomer remaining after treatment for 

 24 hrs                48 hrs                    96 hrs 

 d-T A                100                   100                        100 d-A5r                100                   100                        100 d-TpT                100                   100                        100 d-l pT                95                    97                        91 d-qgG{T              100                   100                        100 d-ApApA               93                    87                        75 d-C pC ApT            92                    83                        67 

 completely stable over a 96 hr period.  The maximum rate of hydrolysis for a methylphosphonate linkage in those oligomers which were hydrolyzed is 

 estimated to be 0.13 mole %/hr. The results of these studies show that the oligonucleoside methylphosphonates could be cleaved from the 1% crosslinked support and completely freed of base protecting groups with little or no hydrolysis of the methylphosphonate linkage by treatment with 

 ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) at room temperature for 7 hrs. These conditions were subsequently adopted for the deprotection step. 

 Purification of Oligonucleoside Methylphosphonates. Two methods were employed to purify oligomers following cleavage from the support. For oligomers which contain only methylphosphonate linkages, the tritylated oligomer was isolated 

 by preparative reversed phase HPLC. This separation is based upon the greater affinity of the tritylated oligomer for the hydrophobic C-18 matrix of the 

 column. Shorter, non-tritylated oligomers were first eluted with a 0% to 25% or 0% to 30% acetonitrile in water gradient. The tritylated product was then eluted with a step gradient of 50% acetonitrile in water. 

 The dimethoxytrityl group was removed from the material in the 50% 

 acetonitrile fraction by treatment with 80% acetic acid at room temperature. Because these oligomers were originally cleaved from the support by 

 ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) at 65?C, we usually found that the 

 tritylated oligomer fraction contained shorter oligomers in addition to the desired product. These were easily separated by preparative reversed phase HPLC. While this purification procedure is qualitatively satisfactory, 

 recoveries from the reversed phase columns varied from 50% to 90%. These 

 losses which appeared to be due to irreverisble absorption of the oligomers to the column varied depending on the base composition of the oligomers. 

 6236 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 Figure 2: Purification of 

 d-ApApApApGpCpApApG.  (a) Ol igomers obtained after treatment of support wi th ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, 

 v/v).  (b)  Ol igomers obtained after treatment of the mixture in (a) with 80% acetic acid. (c) Oligomers eluted from DEAE cellulose column with 

 0.15 M triethylammonium bicarbonate. 

 (d) Nonamer obtained after preparative reversed phase HPLC. Peaks marked 

 with the symbol (X) are derived from impurities in the solvents used to elute the oligomer from the polystyrene support. 

 d                    "AAAGCAAGc 

 O      I      t10   15     20      25 

 Time ( min ) 

 For the oligomers which terminate with a 5'-nucleoside phosphotriester group, the support was first treated for 40 hrs with tetra-n-butylammonium 

 fluoride (8) to remove the p-chlorophenyl protecting group.  These oligomers 

 6237 

 b 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 were then cleaved from the support and the base protecting groups were removed by treatment with ethylenediamine/ethanol (1:1, v/v) for 7 hrs at room temperature. For example, the reversed phase HPLC profile for products 

 obtained after cleavage of the nonamer, d-[(MeO)2Tr]ApAjApApGpCpApApG, is shown in Figure 2a. The peaks marked with (X) are from impurities in the 

 solvents used to elute the oligomer from the support. The tritylated nonamer appears at 22 min in the chromatogram and is eluted with 50% aqueous 

 acetonitrile. After removal of the dimethoxytrityl group, the nonamer elutes at 15.2 min (Figure 2b). The peaks which appear between 19 and 25 min are shorter oligomers which contain a 5'-mesitylenesulfonate group. 

 At this stage, the nonamer was partially purified by ion exchange 

 chromatography on a DEAE cellulose column. This step, which resulted in 84% recovery of material loaded onto the column, removed most of the shorter 

 oligomers as shown in Figure 2c. After removal of the buffer, the nonamer was purified by preparative reversed phase HPLC using a 0% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1 M ammonium acetate gradient. The recovery of material from the column 

 (84%) appears to be higher when ammonium acetate is used. The pure nonamer 

 (Figure 2d) was obtained in 10% overall yield based on the amount of d-[(MeO)2 Tr]ibuG originally bound to the polystyrene support. The oligomer was desalted on a Bio-Gel P-2 gel filtration column. Similar results were 

 obtained for the other oligomers purified by this method. Thus, for example dApApA and d-ApCpCpApT were obtained in 44% and 22% isolated yields respectively based upon the amount of d-[(MeO)2Tr]N. 

 The 5'-terminal nucleotide may be removed enzynatically to give an 

 oligomer which contains only methylphosphonate linkages. Thus treatment of 

 the nonamer, d-ApApApApGpCpApApG, with spleen phosphodiesterase gave d-Ap and 

 the octamer d-ApApApGpCpApApG whose retention time is 16.4 min on the reversed phase column. The noncharged octamer was freed of d-Ap and enzyne by simply passing it through a small DEAE cellulose column. 

 Characterization. Methylphosphonate linkages are cleaved by base. We have found piperdine is particularly effective. The cleavage occurs in a random manner giving nucleosides, nucleoside 3'- or 5'-methylphosphonates and 

 nucleoside 3',5'-bis-methylphosphonates. This hydrolysis reaction may be used to characterize dimers, since the identity and ratio of the products formed are easily determined by reversed phase HPLC. However, the method becomes less satisfactory for longer oligomers. 

 Purine-containing oligonucleoside methylphosphonates may be depurinated by treatment with hydrochloric acid at 650. The methylphosphonate linkage is 

 6238 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 9                     0                        OH cH3P:O                  cH CH3P 

 9                       9 

 CH-P :O             C   cH  :0pO 

 O~~          ~j4              HO OP 3 0         H        0      0OH0 

 9                      S               S 

 Figure 3: Hydrolysis of the internucleoside methylphsophonate linkages at an 

 apurinic site produced by treatment of the oligomer with hydrochloric acid at pH 2. 

 resistant to hydrolysis by these conditions as shown by the stability of d-TpT and d-TpTpT. On the other hand, dimers or trimers containing purine bases 

 such as d-ApA, dApT, dTpA or d-ApApA have half-lives between 92 and 144 min in 0.01 M hydrochloric acid. Following neutralization with ammonium hydroxide, the products of these reactions were characterized by reversed phase HPLC. 

 d-ApA gave adenine, while both d-ApT and d-TpA gave adenine and thymidine as the sole products of the reaction. Adenine and d-ApA were the only products 

 observed when d-ApApA was partially hydrolyzed.    When d-CpCpApT was completely hydrolyzed in acid three products, d-CpC, adenine and thynidine, were observed in a molar ratio of 1:1:1. 

 In contrast to the base hydrolysis of the methylphosphonate group, apurinic sites produced by acid treatment are further hydrolyzed to 

 nucleosides or oligomers with free 5'- and 3'-OH groups. The absence of 

 terminal phosphonate residues suggests hydrolysis occurs as shown in Figure 3. The OH group on the 4'-carbon generated by opening the ribose at the apurinic site may participate in an intramolecular attack on the adjacent phosphonate linkages which results in removal of the phosphonate residues from the neighboring nucleoside hydroxyls. 

 Previous studies by Agarwal and Riftina indicated dithymidine methyl- or phenylphosphonates can be phosphorylated by polynucleotide kinase (9). 

 Sinha et al. reported that dimers but not trimers or tetramers served as 

 substrates for this enzyme (4). We were unable to phosphorylate tetramers or longer oligomers which contain only methylphosphonate linkages. However, those oligomers which terminate with a 5'-dAp-residue are readily 

 6239 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 a 

 ATP                  1 

 1     2    3    4 

 b 

 6 mer Mik  

 6 mer        go 

 3mer a   a       a X 2mer            do ATP 411 

 12 w      34 

 1   2   3  4     5   6 

 Figure 4:  (a) PEI-cellulose TLC of T4 polynucleotide kinase reactions. 

 1) [y-32p]ATP; 2) d-ApApA reaction mixture; 3) d-ApGpCpApApG 

 reaction mixture; 4) d-ApApApApG_pCpApAeG reaction mixture.  The chromatogram was eluted wi th1.5 M pyridinium formate, pH 3.5. (b) Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of phosphoryljted 

 olihonucleoside methylghosphonates.  1) markers:  d-  pTpT (2 mer); d-,3pApApA (3 mer); d- 2pApGpCpApApG (6 mer); 

 d-32pApApApApGpCpApApG (9 mer .  Lanes 2-4 : products  obtained 

 after partTaT fy?rlysis of dl2pApApA (2); d- 2pApGpCpApApG (3) and d-32pApARApApGpCpAZARG; (4) with 0.5 M piperidine at 377C for 10 min   Lanel t   : products  obtained Wfter partial hydrolysis of d-3Kp-ApGRCpApApG (5) and d-32p-ApApAppGpjCppAjG (6) with 0.5 M HC1 at 371C fCor30 min. Electrophoresis was carried out at 

 constant voltage (800 v) until the bromphenol blue marker dye had migrated halfway down the gel. 

 phosphorylated by polynucleotide kinase. The phosphorylation reaction is easily followed by PEI-cellulose TLC. As shown in Figure 4a, the phosphorylated oligomers have a higher Rf values than does d-ATP. 

 The phosphorylated methylphosphonate oligomers can be separated according to their chain lengths by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on an 18% gel 

 containing 7 M urea as shown in Figure 4(b). Lane 1 shows the separation of a trimer, hexamer and nonamer. The band which appears directly below the 

 nonamer may arise from traces of contaminating octamer which were not removed during the purification of d-ApApApApGpCpApApG. 

 6240 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 When the oligomers were partially hydrolyzed with piperidine, a series of new bands appears corresponding to shorter oligomers produced via hydrolysis of the methylphosphonate linkages (Lanes 2-4). Because of the random nature of this cleavage reaction, the oligomers should terminate with either a 3'-OH or a 3'-methylphosphonate group. In the case of the trimer, 32pApApA, 

 hydrolysis gives two bands which correspond to d-32pApA and d-32pApAp (Lane 2). The same products are observed for hydrolysis of the nonamer, 

 d-32pApApApApGpCpApApG (Lane 4). A similar situation is observed for 

 d32pApGpCpApApG although the dimers d-32pApG and d-32pApGp have somewhat 

 different mobilities (Lane 3). These dimers cannot be separated when the gel is run in the absence of urea. 

 It is possible to determine the chain lengths of the original oligomers 

 by counting the number of oligomers produced by partial piperidine hydrolysis. For example, starting with the trimer band, one can observe 3 bands 

 corresponding to tetramer, pentamer and hexamer for the hydrolysis products of d-32pApGpCpApApG (Lane 3) and 6 bands corresponding to tetramer, pentamer, hexamer, heptamer, octamer and nonamer for the hydrolysis products of 

 32pApApApApGpCpApApG (Lane 4). The positions of the oligomers of the same 

 chain length appear to be very similar which suggests that the mobilities are not greatly affected by base composition on the urea-containing gel. This 

 procedure thus provides a rapid and convenient method for characterizing the methyl phosphonate ol i gomers. 

 Treatment of the phosphorylated oligomers with acid produces shorter 

 oligomers which result from chain cleavage at apurinic sites.  In this case the oligomers terminate with a 3'-OH group. Treatment of 32pApGpCpApALpG 

 produces an intense band corresponding to the pentamer, d-32pApGjCpAjA (Lane 5) while treatment of 32pApApApApGpCpApApG produces an intense band corresponding to the octamer d-32pApApAPApGpCpApA and fainter bands 

 corresponding to the heptamer, hexamer, tetramer and trimer. These results suggest that under the conditions of the experiment, hydrolysis occurs preferentially at the 3'-terminal G residue of both oligomers. 

 It should be possible to extend this methodology to other base specific 

 depurination or depyrimidination reactions similar to those employed in the Maxam-Gilbert sequencing method (10). Experiments directed toward this goal are currently in progress and will be reported in a future communication. 

 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: This work was supported in part by the following grants from the National Institutes of Health: GM 16066 (P.O.P.T.) and GM 31927 

 6241 

 Nucleic Acids Research 

 (P.S.M.), and from a grant from Association for International Cancer Research. 

 REFERENCES: 

 1. MTTITr, P.S., McParland, K.B., Jayaraman, K. and Ts'o, P.O.P. (1981) 

 Biochemistry 20, 1874-1880. 

 2. Jayaraman, K., McParland, K.B., Miller, P.S. and Ts'o, P.O.P. (1981) 

 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 78, 1537-1541. 

 3. Miller, P.S., Agris, C.H., Blandin, M., Murakami, A., Reddy, P.M., 

 Spitz, S.A. and Ts'o, P.O.P. (1983) Nucleic Acids Res., submitted for publ ication. 

 4. Sinha, N.D. Grossbruchaus, V. and Koester, H. (1983) Tetrahedron Letters 

 24, 877-880. 

 5. Miller, P.S., Cheng, D.M., Dreon, N., Jayaraman, K., Kan, L.-S., 

 Leutzinger, E.E., Pulford, S.M. and Ts'o, P.O.P. (1980) Biochemistry 19, 4688-4698. 

 6. Ito, H., Ike, Y., Ikuta, S. and Itakura, K., (1982) Nucleic Acids Res 

 10, 1755-1769. 

 7. Barnett, R.W. and Letsinger, R.L. (1981) Tetrahedron Letters 22, 

 991-994. 

 6242 